Add governance doc (#155)
scientific-python/scientific-python.org: content/en/about/governance.md

---
title: "Governance and Decision Making"
draft: false
---

# Abstract

> Scientific Python is a consensus-based community project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Scientific Python is a consensus-based community ecosystem.
```

Just a thought on wording, maybe project is better - it would require more rewording below.

Author: I've been trying to use project for the work going on in this GH org and ecosystem to refer to the loosely-federated collection of libraries.

---
title: "Governance and Decision Making"
draft: false
---

# Abstract

Scientific Python is a consensus-based community project.
Anyone with an interest in the project can join the community, contribute to the project design,
and participate in the decision making process.
This document describes how that participation takes place, how to find consensus, and how
deadlocks are resolved.

## Roles And Responsibilities

### Community Members

> The Scientific Python community consists of anyone working with the project in any way.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Scientific Python community consists of anyone working with the project.
```

Community members must adhere to our [code of conduct]({{< relref "/code_of_conduct.md" >}}).

### Community Managers

Community Managers are community members that have demonstrated continued
commitment to the project through ongoing contributions.

> New Community Managers can be nominated by any existing Community Manager.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A new Community Manager can be nominated by any existing Community Manager.
```

Discussion about new Community Manager nominations is one of the few

> activities that takes place on the project\'s private management list.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
activities that takes place on the project's private management forum.
```

The decision to invite a new Community Manager must be made by "lazy consensus",

> meaning unanimous agreement by all responding existing Community Manager.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
meaning unanimous agreement by all responding existing Community Managers.
```

Invitation must take place at least one week after initial nomination,

> to allow existing members time to voice any objections.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to allow existing members time to voice objections.
```

### Leadership Team

> The Leadership Team (LT) members are community managers who have additional responsibilities to ensure the smooth running of the project.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Leadership Team (LT) are community managers who have additional responsibilities to ensure the smooth running of the project.
```

LT members are expected to participate in strategic planning, approve changes to the governance model, and make decisions about funding granted to the project itself.

> (Funding to community members is theirs to pursue and manage.)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
(Funding to community members/projects is theirs to pursue and manage.)
```

> The purpose of the LT is to ensure smooth progress from the big-picture perspective.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The purpose of the LT is to ensure smooth progress on the big-picture [roadmap]{{< relref "roadmap.md" >}}.
```

Changes that impact the full project require analysis informed by long experience with both the project and the larger ecosystem.

> When the core developer community (including the LT members) fails to reach such a consensus in a reasonable timeframe, the LT is the entity that resolves the issue.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When the core developer community (including the LT members) fail to reach such a consensus in a reasonable timeframe, the LT is the entity that resolves the issue.
```

Reviewer 2: I think we typically use plural when members are in disagreement, i.e. operate as many, but can go either way.

### Other Teams

Specific projects may have their own governance structures.
For example,

- The SPEC Steering Committee governance model is described [here]({{< relref "/specs/steering-committee/" >}}).

## Decision Making Process

Decisions about the future of the project are made through discussion with all members of the community.

> All non-sensitive project management discussion takes place on the public forums.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All non-sensitive project management discussion takes place on the [public forum](https://discuss.scientific-python.org).
```

TODO: link to specific category there

Changes that impact the full project require analysis informed by long experience with both the project and the larger ecosystem.
When the Community Managers (including the Community Leaders) fail to reach such a consensus in a reasonable timeframe, the Community Leaders may resolve the issue.

### Other Teams

Specific projects may have their own governance structures.
For example, the SPEC Steering Committee governance model is described [here]({{< relref "/specs/steering-committee/" >}}).

## Decision Making Process

Decisions about the future of the project are made through discussion with all members of the community.
All non-sensitive project management discussion takes place on the [public forum](https://discuss.scientific-python.org).
Occasionally, sensitive discussion may occur on a private list.

Scientific Python uses a *consensus seeking* process for making decisions.
The group tries to find a resolution that has no open objections among community managers.
Community managers are expected to distinguish between fundamental objections to a proposal and minor perceived flaws that they can live with, and not hold up the decision making process for the latter.

> If no option can be found without an objection, the decision is escalated to the Community Leaders, which will itself use consensus seeking to come to a resolution.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If no option can be found without an objection, the decision is escalated to the Community Leaders, who will themselves use consensus seeking to come to a resolution.
```
